The High Moor (Western Heartlands)
Environment & Common Wildlife: The High Moor is a vast, untamed plateau of rough grasslands, bogs, and rocky ridges. It supports hardy wildlife despite its bleakness. Wild ponies (known as High Moor rock ponies) roam the plains, grazing in herds on tough scrub – though they are too unruly to be easily tamed as mounts. Smaller mammals like hares, badgers, and skunks survive on the moor as well. Game birds nest in the grasses, and giant eagles are sometimes seen hunting from the crags. These native creatures form the base of the food chain for the Moor’s predators. However, the presence of many monsters means the populations of gentler creatures remain thin. Local tribespeople note that the wolves of the Moor prey primarily on the wild ponies and other hoofed animals, helping keep those herds in check. Insect life is abundant in summer, including blood-sucking flies that plague travelers and feed frogs and marsh birds in the boggy areas.
Tribal Inhabitants (Goblinoids & Others): The High Moor has long been a haunt of goblinoid tribes. Several tribes of goblins and orcs dwell here, often riding on trained worgs (giant wolves) when hunting or raiding. Hobgoblins and even gnolls also make camps on the fringes. These tribes are ferocious and territorial, but they tend to fight each other as much as intruders. There are even a few scattered human barbarians and a reclusive band of wild elves living in the South Wood and Misty Forest at the Moor’s edge. All these intelligent inhabitants fiercely guard their territories. The goblin and orc clans have learned to be wary of the High Moor’s monsters. For instance, they rarely investigate cries in the night – having learned that a piteous scream out on the moor is likely a leucrotta’s lure, not a true call for help. The tribes pass this lore down, and thus they seldom fall victim to such tricks even if outsiders do. Relations between the tribes are usually violent, but occasionally they unite under a charismatic leader to repel a greater threat. (Legends even tell of a long-vanished city built by goblins here, centuries past. One tale claims that city’s sorcerer-kings “captured a minor goddess in order to steal her power,” an act that supposedly led to the city’s doom. While the city is gone, fragments of its myth linger as cautionary lore.)
Monstrous Predators: The High Moor’s most infamous predators are the leucrotta and trolls, both common enough to have entire entries in scholarly accounts. A leucrotta is a sly, cruel beast resembling a mix of stag, hyena, and badger. It contributes nothing good to the world – except perhaps by hunting unwary adventurers. Leucrotta prefer “the easier prey of travelers”, whom they lure off the road by imitating the cries of a distressed child or animal. Many a compassionate wayfarer has rushed toward plaintive screams in the mist, only to be ambushed and devoured by a pair of these wicked creatures. Local folk have learned to ignore mysterious cries in the night. When hungry enough, leucrotta will attack wildlife or even raid goblin camps, but they much prefer soft, naive prey. The trolls of the High Moor are equally feared. These hulking regenerating monsters lurk in the Fire Marshes at the Moor’s southern end and in the Undermoor (the caverns below). They emerge to hunt at night or in dim light, devouring anything living. Trolls here have the typical near-invulnerability to anything but fire and acid. Travelers who light large fires at night often do so as a deterrent against troll attacks. Other rare monsters also roam anywhere on the plateau – one might encounter a lone chimera or wyvern gliding over the moor, or a giant serpent slithering among the crags. Fortunately these greater threats are few, or the goblin tribes would be even more beleaguered than they are.
“Abominations” and Extraplanar Threats: Local druids speak of certain creatures as “abominations” – beings so unnatural that they lie outside the normal ecological web. On the High Moor, these include things like fiends and elemental monsters that occasionally appear. The ruins of Dragonspear Castle on the Moor’s western edge have a dark reputation for planar portals. Indeed, devils (baatezu) have been reported near those cursed ruins from time to time. In the Fire Marshes, one may encounter fiery outsiders such as the stray salamander or even a wandering fire elemental, drawn to the Marsh’s spontaneous flames. Such entities never truly integrate into the local ecosystem – they exist only to destroy or dominate. Some serve as eerie “tribal patrons,” demanding worship or sacrifices from goblin or human tribes in exchange for power. One notorious abomination is the Crimson Death, an undead cloud of blood-mist that suffocates victims. These vampiric mists sometimes lair in the marsh and prey upon any living creature they find, even cowing nearby goblin clans into leaving offerings. Undead also stalk the High Moor, especially near old tombs and ruins. The flooded dungeons beneath ruined Halls of the Hammer (an ancient dwarfhold by Highstar Lake) are said to be guarded by “powerful undead horrors”, including helmed horrors and worse. Fortunately, such evils rarely stray far from their lairs. Finally, the Underdark beneath the Moor (the “Undermoor”) is home to fell creatures like derro (degenerate dwarves) and ophidian snake-men. They occasionally creep to the surface to hunt. The Gray Druid of the Moor notes that **“dead things sometimes ooze out of the depths to annoy the locals”】 – adventurers delving into caverns below may stir up such threats if they are not careful.
Rumors & Legends: Aside from the legend of a lost goblin city and its stolen goddess’s power, the High Moor holds many secrets. The Highstar Lake at the Moor’s center is rumored to be cursed – local guides whisper that “once a season or so adventurers claim a new room or two [in the Halls of the Hammer] – usually at the cost of their companions’ lives”, and that no one has yet claimed the great glowing hammer said to lie in those ruins. Treasure-hunters continue to be drawn by such legends. Another tale claims a copper dragon watches over part of the Moor, hoarding giant scorpions as food in the nearby hills. And the Grim Grey Druids of the Moor warn that if adventurers cause too much havoc, the land itself may take vengeance. As one druid curtly puts it, adventurers blundering about “release ancient curses and abominations…and then leave”, forcing the druids to clean up the mess. Thus, the High Moor remains a place where wise travelers move quietly and leave no trace.
